We continue to make our way through this book, we'll be looking at the first nine verses
this evening.
Over the last couple of messages we've gone through chapter 26 and chapter 27 and both
of them in their entirety in single messages.
And of course last week as we studied the 27th chapter of the book of Genesis we noted
the carnality and the deception and we of course as you go through the passage of Scripture
and see all that's taking place we ended in Genesis chapter 27 by dealing with the
subject matter of Rebekah of course speaking to Isaac with regard to Jacob being sent away.
She had heard how Esau said that he was going to kill his brother after he had buried his
father and so of course there's some drama that's going on there.
As we enter into the 28th chapter we find that the Bible says this, that Isaac called
The 27th chapter ends with Rebekah speaking to Isaac about this situation and about the
grief of heart that she would have if Jacob were to marry one from Canaan.
And so it tells us in verse number one that
thy mother's brother.
We'll look at the first nine verses this evening.
I've titled the message tonight there from verse number one, Isaac blessed him and charged
him.
As we look at this passage of Scripture of course we're mindful of the blessing that
was given in the 27th chapter and we read this with regard to Isaac blessing Jacob in
verses 28 and 29 and then of course Jacob departs and Esau enters and all that takes
place.
And now as we come to Genesis chapter number 28 obviously there's an awareness as to all
that has just transpired in the life of this family and we find that the discussion took
place and Isaac agrees with the recommendation and he's going to give a blessing and a charge.
And as we look at this passage of Scripture I want to note first of all in these first
few verses the instruction from Isaac.
Notice the instruction that is given.
The Bible says that he blessed him and charged him but we note first of all the instruction
from Isaac with regard to marriage.
In verses one, the end of verse number one and verse number two we see that there's information
given to us with regard to this instruction that is being given regarding marriage.
Notice at the end of verse number one it says specifically who was prohibited, who was not
allowed.
It says thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan.
Now you'll remember in our study a couple of weeks ago at the end of chapter number
26 the Bible told us in verse number 34 that Esau was 40 years old when he took to wife
Judith the daughter of Barai the Hittite and Bashamath the daughter of Elon the Hittite
and it tells us this which were a grief of mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah.
That situation really was something that was used by Rebekah when she says to Isaac
at verse number 46 in Genesis 27 she says to Isaac, I am weary of my life because of
the daughters of Heth.
If Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth such as these which are of the daughters of
the land what good shall my life do me?
And so we find that this instruction that is given from Isaac to Jacob begins first
of all with the subject matter of marriage.
He says you thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan.
He then says this in verse number 2, Arise go to Paddan Aram to the house of Bethuel
thy mother's father.
Notice now who is permitted and take thee a wife from Fentz of the daughters of Laban
thy mother's brother.
So we find that this instruction is being provided from Isaac to Jacob and it's instruction
that is really necessary.
I would say this with regard to the instruction that is given in the end of verse number 1
and verse number 2 that instruction regarding marriage is critical.
It's absolutely critical and I believe that parents should purpose to properly instruct
their children with regard to marriage.
We believe that marriage is designed by God, right?
Marriage is God's plan and God has given instruction within his word with regard to marriage.
It's not man's idea, it's not the government's idea, it's not their place to define what
marriage is or to give details with regard to how marriage works.
We find that God in his precious book, the Bible, has given us the institution of marriage,
the institution of the home.
He's given us the instruction with regard to the home and really apart from salvation,
the individual that your son or daughter is going to marry is probably the biggest decision
of their life.
You think about that.
Think about the weight of that decision of who your son or your daughter marries and
how important that decision is.
It's not a decision that we enter into lightly.
It's not a decision that we don't need counsel with regard to that decision.
We need, parents need to recognize the importance of our counsel to our children with regard
to this all-important decision.
We don't take marriage lightly.
We don't approach marriage the way that perhaps the world would approach marriage, that we're
just going to try it out, that we're just going to see how this works, that we could
always get a divorce if it doesn't work.
That's not the mindset of a child of God.
Amen?
That's not how we approach it.
And we approach it as it is, a sacred marriage that is designed by God Almighty.
And as I think about this instruction that is given, the reality is that this instruction
that's given doesn't mean that instruction is going to be followed, right?
We understand that we can give instruction and we can give the counsel to our children
with regard to marriage, but it doesn't mean that they're going to follow it.
There should be some parameters by which godly parents are able to give instruction to their
children with regard to, as I've noted the two categories here, some that are prohibited
and some that are permitted.
I'm not suggesting that we would have some type of an arranged marriage.
I'm not suggesting that we would do that sort of thing.
But what I'm saying is that we need to give some counsel to our children.
I was young when I got married.
I was 21 years old when I got married, and that's young.
And I needed some counsel with regard to that decision and understanding that I was entering
into a lifelong commitment.
Now 20 and a half years later, I'm thankful that Holly is still standing by my side, amen?
And I'm thankful for the counsel that I received.
But now it's my responsibility, I have three children.
Those of you that have children, to give that instruction.
Begin praying now for your children with regard to that decision regarding marriage.
How important this is.
Perhaps how things might have been different, I understand that we cannot play the perhaps
game in scripture and try to use the hypotheticals, but perhaps if instruction had been properly
given to Esau, could it have changed the course of his decisions?
We don't know the answer to the question.
Because we understand that instruction given doesn't mean instruction will be followed.
But this instruction that is provided here is of utmost importance.
I know that we've sat down with our children and we've gone through some things with regard
to, hey listen, who's somebody that would be qualified to be able to marry?
What is the criteria?
There ought to be some criteria, amen?
And listen, at the top of the list isn't, they're so beautiful, amen?
Because that's not the number one important thing.
You know what the top of the list should be for a saved person?
That they're saved, amen?
And then you begin to think about that truth of not being unequally yoked.
It doesn't just mean saved and saved, though that's where it starts.
But we ought to desire for our children to have a spouse who has a spiritual mind and
a desire to serve God and live for God.
We find that this instruction is given, why is it that in verse number two, he gives the
instruction with regard to who was permitted.
I believe that there's some insight given to us, obviously Rebecca had some influence,
but go back to Genesis chapter 25 if you will and look here, Genesis 24, excuse me, I want
you to look in Genesis chapter number 24.
You'll be mindful of this passage of scripture, it records for us the marriage of Isaac.
You'll remember that Abraham, he was concerned that Isaac properly marry.
However, he says this in verse number three, and I will make thee swear by the Lord, the
God of heaven and the God of the earth, that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of
the daughters of the Canaanites among whom I dwell, but thou shalt go unto my country
and to my kindred and take a wife unto my son Isaac.
Man, doesn't that sound similar to what Isaac did?
Isaac is now saying about Jacob.
And we find here that Abraham had given this instruction
to his servant, I believe it's Eleazar,
and we give this instruction, but I want you to see,
and we studied this passage in great detail,
there was very specific prayer with regard to the one
that God would send, and we know that the servant
prayed specifically, and God answered specifically,
and the servant worshiped, and we find that in verse 48,
if you skip all the way over there,
it says that I bowed down my head and worshiped the Lord.
At this point, he's there in the home,
he's speaking to Laban and Bethuel,
the father and brother of Rebekah,
and he says, I bowed down my head and worshiped the Lord
and blessed the Lord God of my master Abraham,
which had led me in the right way to take my master's
brother's daughter unto his son,
and now if you will deal kindly and truly with my master,
tell me, and if not, tell me, that I may turn
to the right hand or to the left.
Now notice what it said, then Laban and Bethuel,
this is the brother and father of Rebekah,
they answered, notice what they say,
the thing proceedeth from the Lord.
There was obviously some understanding that they had,
some influence that had been given to them,
because they understood as the servant of Abraham
rehearsed what he had experienced,
they respond by saying the thing proceedeth from the Lord,
we cannot speak unto thee bad or good,
behold, Rebekah is before thee, take her and go,
and let her be thy master's son's wife
as the Lord hath spoken.
And now as we come to chapter number 28,
we find that the Bible says that he,
Isaac is giving this instruction,
it says that he calls Jacob, he blessed him,
he charged him, and the charge, the instruction
is with regard to marriage at the end of verse number one,
and in verse number two.
I would say this, parents understand the responsibility
of giving such instruction, pray for,
don't undervalue the importance of prayer,
do not undervalue the impact of prayer.
And I would say this to young people,
listen to your parents.
I'm not saying that parents are always right,
maybe you're in a condition, a situation,
where maybe it's not maybe a why situation,
but the reality is if you have godly parents,
God-fearing parents, man, I'd put some weight
into the counsel of my parents, amen?
And I'd understand that my parents have some experience,
and they have some wisdom, and they have,
we understand this, God in his sovereignty
gave you the parents that he gave you, amen?
And we ought to rejoice in that and be thankful for that.
Notice as this instruction continues,
really it's the blessing, notice in verse number three
and verse number four, the Bible says,
and God Almighty bless thee.
Notice he says, and God Almighty bless thee.
I'm so thankful that our God is a God
who blesses his people.
You think about the blessings,
Jeff mentioned this morning where the psalmist says
that he daily loadeth me with benefits.
We speak about the blessings of the Lord.
You find that later on in the Pentateuch
that Moses will stand before the people of God,
and he will say that I lay before you today
a blessing and a curse.
And we find that so often in the scriptures,
the blessing is tied directly to obedience.
And as we obey the voice of God,
the blessing of God flows out.
The songwriter said,
count your blessings, name them one by one.
And you think about that exercise,
and you think about the benefit of rehearsing those benefits.
And as we rehearse the blessings
and how we're encouraged,
and we then have the opportunity to encourage others.
And Isaac says, and God Almighty bless thee
and make thee fruitful and multiply thee
that thou mayest be a multitude of people.
Notice what he says in verse number four,
and give thee the blessing of Abraham.
Now remember that God specifically blessed Abraham,
and God had given that blessing to Abraham,
and God blessed and told him about a land and a seed.
And we've studied that for weeks and weeks
as you've looked through those portions
of the book of Genesis.
And now we find that Isaac is now mentioning
and specifically tying the blessing
from God to Abraham to Jacob.
It says this, to thee and to thy seed with thee
that thou mayest inherit the land
wherein thou art a stranger,
which God gave unto Abraham.
And so you find now as we look at this blessing
that is regarded as the,
often we refer to as the Abrahamic covenant, right?
The seed and the land.
And now Isaac is called Jacob.
He's blessed him and he's charged him.
He's given him instruction with regard to marriage.
He's rehearsed the blessing.
He's specifically invoking the blessing of Abraham upon him
with regard to the seed and also with regard to the land.
And what a blessing to see this unfolding
as you continue to make your way
through the book of Genesis.
We leave the instruction from Isaac
and we see number two this evening in verse number five,
number two, the departure of Jacob.
We find the Bible tells us,
and Isaac sent away Jacob and he went to Paddan Aram,
unto Laban, son of Bethuel the Syrian,
the brother of Rebekah, Jacob's and Esau's mother.
And so we see that Jacob departed
just as he was instructed.
And I wanna remind you as what we studied last week,
if you turn back, maybe it's on the same page for you,
but in Genesis 27, in verse number 43,
at this point, it's Rebekah speaking to Jacob.
And Rebekah says, now, therefore, my son,
obey my voice and arise,
flee thou to Laban, my brother, to Haran,
and tarry with him a few days
until thy brother's fury turn away.
She says this, until thy brother's anger
turn away from thee and he forget
that which thou hast done to him,
then I will send and fetch thee from thence.
Why should I be deprived also of you both in one day?
And so we find that initially when Rebekah had heard
about the response of Esau, his hatred,
and what he said with regard to the days of mourning
being at hand for the death of his father,
he said, then will I slay my brother Jacob
at the end of verse number 41.
And Rebekah's seeking to provide some level of safety
for her son, Jacob, and as she's seeking
to provide this safety from Jacob,
she says this, flee thou to Laban, my brother, to Haran.
At this particular moment in verse number 43,
she's really not thinking about a spouse for Jacob,
she's simply thinking about safety for Jacob.
We find that she invokes and speaks about the spouse
in verse number 46, and thus gets Isaac on board
to give the instruction that we've just rehearsed
at the beginning of Genesis chapter 28.
But I want you to notice that safety
is what she's thinking of in verse number 43.
She's also thinking this is going to be
a very temporary situation.
She says in verse number 43, verse number 44, excuse me,
for a few days, a few days.
And then she says in verse number 45
that when your brother's anger turn away from thee
and he forgets what you've done,
then I'm gonna send and fetch you that you'll return.
Now we understand as you read the next several chapters
of the book of Genesis, this departure that is recorded
for us in verse number five, the next several chapters
are going to record for us the events
in the days and years ahead in the life of Jacob.
These several chapters provide us
with a record of these events,
and we know based on the scriptures
that these few days that were spoken of by Rebekah
in fact turn into many years.
In Genesis chapter number 31,
if you skip over just a few chapters,
and we made note of this very briefly last Sunday evening,
but you notice in verse number 38
when he's having this discussion before he is leaving,
it says here this 20 years have I been with thee,
thy ewes and thy she goats have not cast their young
and the rams of thy flock have I not eaten.
Who's he speaking to?
Well, in verse number 36, it says that Jacob was wroth
and chode with Laban, right?
So we see that this is the context,
and he says this 20 years have I been with thee.
And so the instruction at the end of verse number 27
was to go for a few days for the purpose of that safety,
and we find that that few days turned into years,
and we have the next several chapters
to read of those events that take place.
I made note of this last week.
It's worth repeating that at this time of departure
when the Bible says that Isaac sent away Jacob,
that this would be the last day on this earth
that Jacob would ever see Rebecca.
And she said in verse number 14, 13 it was,
of Genesis chapter 27, upon me be thy curse,
my son, only obey my voice and go and fetch me them.
And what a sad situation, a sad response
of this really carnality and deception
of Genesis chapter 27.
But we now find that Isaac sent away Jacob,
and he went to where he was supposed to go.
Remember he told him in verse number two,
arise, go to Paddan Aram, to the house of Bethuel,
thy mother's father, and take thee a wife from thence
of the daughters of Laban.
And it tells us in verse number five
that he went to Paddan Aram unto Laban,
son of Bethuel, the Syrian, the brother of Rebecca,
Jacob's and Esau's mother.
And so I'm thankful that as we look
at what's taking place here,
that there's a level of obedience.
obedience on the side of Jacob and going to the place in which he was instructed to go.
And we read, and again, the next several chapters, we're going to read and study of all of the
events that transpired during his journey, and then, of course, while he's there with
Laban and not only his wives, but also the children that God blesses him with, and we'll
study those things over the next several chapters.
The next several chapters, in fact, focus very much predominantly in the life of Jacob.
Notice in verse number six down through verse number nine of our text of Scripture, number
three, the response of Esau.
So we've seen the instruction of Isaac, we've seen the departure of Jacob, and now note
the response of Esau.
It's interesting to me because as you look at this passage of Scripture and you find
in verse number one, the Bible says that Isaac called Jacob and blessed him and charged him.
Obviously, Rebekah and Isaac had had the conversation.
The last time we saw Esau, at the end of chapter number 27, he was very disappointed,
very angry.
The Bible tells us that he hated Jacob because of the blessing, and he was very distraught
over what had taken place.
But as we read verses six through nine, here in Genesis chapter number 28, we find that
Esau is very aware of what's taking place.
Esau is very aware of what's taking place and what has transpired.
Notice the Bible says in verse number six, when Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob
and sent him away to Paddan Aram to take him a wife from Thense, and that as he blessed
him, he gave him a charge saying, thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan.
So Esau was aware of what happened.
Esau was aware of this blessing and this charge.
What was it that Esau desired so much?
He desired a blessing, right?
Remember, when Esau entered in Genesis chapter number 27, it tells us that he came back from
hunting in verse number 31, that he made that savory meat.
And his father in verse number 32 said, who art thou?
And it says in verse number 33 that Isaac trembled very exceedingly and said, who?
Where is he that hath taken venison and brought it me?
And I have eaten of all before thou camest and have blessed him, yea, and he shall be
blessed.
And we find that Esau says to his father in verse number 38, hast thou but one blessing,
O father?
Bless me, even me also, O my father.
And Esau lifted up his voice and wept.
He wanted the blessing.
He wanted to have a blessing from his father.
Of course, we understand that the blessing that is mentioned that Isaac his father answered
and said unto him, behold, in verse 39, thy dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth
and the dew of heaven from above by thy sword shalt thou live and shalt serve thy brother.
It shall come to pass when thou shalt have the dominion that thou shalt break his yoke
from off thy neck.
And we mentioned of the turmoil between the descendants of Jacob and the descendants of
Esau.
As you read throughout the Old Testament, you see such a conflict between the descendants
of Jacob.
Who are they?
The children of Israel.
The descendants of Esau.
Who are they?
The Edomites.
And you read about the conflict between the Edomites and about the children of Israel
and you find that it was there according to verse number 40 when it says it shall come
to pass when thou shalt have the dominion that thou shalt break his yoke from off thy
neck.
Now, that did not happen during the reign of Jehoram.
According to 2 Kings chapter number 8, we looked at that briefly last week, but we find
that Esau was desiring a blessing.
And we find that when he observes what's taking place, he's aware of what's happened.
He's heard the charge that was received.
You notice specifically that it tells us in verse number 6 and that it says that when
Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob, sent him away to Paddan Aram to take him away from
fence and that as he blessed him, he gave him a charge saying, thou shalt not take a
wife of the daughters of Canaan.
I'd say this, Esau was paying attention, wasn't he?
I mean, he saw what had taken place.
He was observing and he was attentive to what was transpiring.
And the Bible tells us that not only did he see and was he aware of what had happened,
but in verse number 7, he then observes the obedience of his brother Jacob.
The Bible says that Jacob obeyed his father and his mother and was gone to Paddan Aram
and Esau saw that.
So now I believe that as you look at these next few verses of Scripture, that in the
mind of Esau, again, not a ton of information given to us, but it seems like the response
of Esau is based upon what he has seen, what he has observed, and how he might be able
to receive some type of a blessing.
He sees the obedience of Jacob, his brother, and he understands that his choice in marriage
did not please his parents, Isaac specifically.
It says in verse number 8, and Esau, seeing that the daughters of Canaan pleased not Isaac,
his father.
Now I want you to just pause there for a moment because we find again that the Bible tells
us at the end of chapter number 26 that Esau was 40 years old when he took these two to
be his wives.
We find that the marriage is there.
These both are hit tights according to verse number 34 of Genesis 26.
The Bible tells us that they were a grief of mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah, and we
find that here as Esau heard that Jacob was told, thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters
of Canaan.
Okay, well, I have two wives of the daughters of Canaan, right?
Esau's in that situation.
So he's aware of the fact, he has heard the instruction, he's aware of the fact that these
daughters of Canaan pleased not Isaac, his father.
So now what is he going to do?
The Bible tells us in verse number 9 that he responds, and he went, it says, then went
Esau unto Ishmael and took unto the wives which he had, Mahalath, the daughter of Ishmael,
Abraham's son, the sister of Nebuchadnezzar, to be his wife.
So now he takes another wife, right?
So he has two hit tights that are his wives according to the end of Genesis 26.
Now in response to what he's heard, in response to that which has been communicated from Isaac
to Jacob, he's going to go out and make another decision.
It seems as if, in his own mind, he has this idea that somehow this is going to bring some
kind of good graces in his life.
Why do we think that, or why would I say that?
Well, the interesting thing is that he does not go and take another hit tight to be his
wife.
I want you to think about this just for a moment, and really this is, as we look at
what's happening, and I'm just trying to dissect this for us this evening, to understand that
there are times in which we can use some bad logic and some bad reasoning, and we are
trusting in our own selves instead of trusting the Lord, and I think Esau here is certainly
doing that.
The Bible tells us that he went, it says he went unto Ishmael.
Now who is Laban?
Laban is where Jacob has been sent to find a wife, right?
He says, here's who's prohibited, thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan
in verse number 1, here's who's permitted, and go to Paddan Aram, to the house of Bethuel,
thy mother's father, and take thee a wife from thence of the daughters of Laban, thy
mother's brother.
So who is Laban?
Well, that's the maternal uncle, right?
That's who that is.
Who's Ishmael?
He's the paternal uncle, right?
Because Ishmael and Isaac are both the descendants of Abraham, right?
And so we find, again, I believe it's very poor logic, but I'm trying to get into the
mind of Esau as to why he's responding the way that he is.
I believe that he's trying in his own way to try to figure out how I can get some kind
of a blessing.
And if the maternal uncle's daughters are going to be satisfactory and that's going
to please Isaac and Rebekah for Jacob, then maybe if I go to Ishmael and get a daughter
from Ishmael, that too will result in some kind of a blessing.
Now that's just all my kind of trying to figure out what Esau's doing.
If you have a different thought, it's okay that we disagree on that, and I'm not even
saying that's exactly what he's doing.
It could just be that he's saying, I don't care, I'm already out of graces, I'm just
going to go get another wife.
But it seems as if as much as he wants a blessing, as much as he knows what has happened and
how Jacob has been instructed and he heard and he observed, it seems as if there's something
within Esau that in his own way he's trying to somehow get back into the graces so that
He's going about it all the wrong way.
And we find here that he takes now this daughter of Ishmael, Mahalath, as you see there in
verse number 9.
And I want you to think about this.
We've often mentioned about some of these just people groups throughout the book of
Genesis and some of the long-term conflict between the children of Israel and other people
groups.
You think about the Canaanites, the Hittites, of course you're familiar with the Philistines.
And we mentioned that as we studied the 27th chapter.
Remember the Philistines envied him and all that had taken place.
You think about the conflicts with the Egyptians that you find throughout the Old Testament.
And there's much conflict there between the children of Israel and the children of Esau,
the Edomites.
But then now there's this intermarriage, if you will, where Esau is taking a descendant
of Ishmael.
And it just gets real muddy.
And the reality is that here, as we've mentioned in many times over the last couple of chapters,
it seems as if Esau really has no spiritual desires whatsoever.
The Bible told us, as we looked in Genesis chapter number 25, when you looked at all
that was going on with regard to the marriage of Isaac and Rebekah, that the Bible told
us that Rebekah was barren.
The Bible told us that they, Isaac and Rebekah, entreated the Lord.
They sought God with regard to their barrenness and not having children.
And the Bible tells us that she conceived in Genesis chapter 25 and verse number 21.
And then the Bible rehearses for us a struggle within the womb.
And she inquires of the Lord, and God told her that two nations are in thy womb, and
two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels, and the one people shall be stronger
than the other people, and the elder shall serve the younger.
And of course, we find that the Bible tells us that the first one came out red all over
in hairy garment, like in hairy garment, excuse me, and they called his name Esau in verse
number 25.
And as we begin to understand all that has transpired in really considering that symbolism
that was given to us in Genesis chapter number 25, we noted that there was some supplication,
there was a struggle, and then there was some symbolism.
And we spoke about the two nations.
And we understand, Romans 9 talks about it, and you can study the Scriptures and you can
see the selection of a nation contextually, that's what God's dealing with, the Israelites
and God's plan for the nation of Israel, and the older shall serve the younger.
We looked at that.
But then we also mentioned not only the contextual symbolism and understanding the interpretation,
but we mentioned the two natures, the application, really, of what we looked at in verse number
23 of Genesis chapter number 25.
And when I mentioned those two natures and we spoke about the application, we really
talked about the old man versus the new man.
And we said this, that the older shall serve the younger.
And it really goes in line with what we discussed this morning with the reality of this loving
not the world and understanding that we walked according to the course of this world.
And what's older, the old man or the new man?
The old man, right?
And you were saved after you were born, years later.
And we find that as we would walk in the Spirit so that we would not fulfill the lust of the
flesh, as we would take the truth of God's Word and we would apply it in our hearts and
lives that we can be in a position where we are pleasing the Lord with the decisions that
we make.
I was going to turn to the Galatians, but let me just get back to Genesis and we'll
finish up there.
Notice in Genesis chapter number 28, again, the passage that we're dealing with, I want
you to consider with me the situation as it unfolds in this idea of pleasing and thinking
about the natures here, the behavior of Jacob, the behavior of Esau, and understanding if
we can take from this passage and we can see what's happening, yes, the historical context,
but say, okay, why is God giving us this information?
Why is it here?
God's speaking about the charge and the blessing.
And then we see there are several verses that are given to us with regard to the response
of Esau and how he handled things.
You can't manufacture God's blessing in your life.
You can try, but you can't manufacture God's blessing in your life.
We must purpose to live our lives pleasing to God in obedience.
How was Jacob going to receive the blessing?
We see the obedience.
He was blessed and he was charged.
We understand the nature of the Abrahamic covenant, as it's mentioned here, and really
given in verses three and four, invoked by Isaac upon Jacob.
But I would say this, the obedience of Jacob is essential to his response to his father
with regard to the instruction that has been given.
And he responds, according to verse number five, in obedience and going to that place.
And I want you to think about this.
Jacob went to a place where he didn't know where he was going.
We understand that the Bible tells us, as we will study next week in verses 10 and following,
and you'll see the encounter and the dream that he has and the way in which God speaks
to him.
And what a blessing.
But you understand that he had to take the instruction that was given to him by his father
and respond in obedience.
The blessing of God cannot be manufactured in your life.
It can't be manufactured in my life.
And as Esau would hear what has taken place, as Esau would process it in his own mind in
being the old man and thinking about the approach of maybe that type of thinking, and he says,
okay, well, here's what I'm going to do.
I'm going to do this.
I'm going to try to manufacture this blessing.
It can't happen.
You're not going to manufacture God's blessing in your life.
The blessing of the Lord is precious.
And there are times in which perhaps in our lives that we can go through life and try
to pretend as if we have God's blessing, pretend as if we have God's favor, we've learned how
to put things together.
You understand that if you look, and we don't have time to look at it, but it's really interesting
the way that Solomon had those golden shields and Rehoboam put brass.
The reality is that we find that it's a cheap imitation.
Oh, on the outside it looks like it's the same, but it's not the same.
And we want God's blessing in our life.
Do we understand as we look at a passage of Scripture like this and look at the historical
context?
And it's certainly important to understand that.
But as we begin to think about our own lives and say, well, I want God's blessing in my
life, yes, we see the instruction with regard to marriage, but let's just make it real broad
tonight.
I want God's blessing, period.
I want God's blessing in my life.
I want to please my God.
And how can I please Him?
How can I behave in such a way that He would be pleased and He would be, that I would be
in a position where I could be blessable?
I want you to think about that just for a moment in closing tonight.
I believe tonight that God wants to bless His people, don't you?
God wants to bless His people.
But I want to ask myself this question I want you to ask.
I'm inviting you to ask yourself the question as well.
Am I blessable?
What do I mean by that?
I understand the Bible says, the goodness of God leadeth thee to the repentance.
I understand that.
But let me just use a quick illustration.
As we think about the human relationships between parents and children, parents, I want
to bless my children, but there's sometimes that their behavior doesn't permit the blessing.
Does that make sense?
You want to be gracious to them, and you want to bless them, and you want to
Has there been a time in your family's life, maybe you can think about when you were a
child where you missed out on some kind of blessing from your parents because of your
behavior or maybe even because of the behavior of a sibling?
You say, man, we lost out.
We missed out on that.
And obviously only two of my children are here, and Julianna's down in college.
But Holly and I, we've desired, we want to bless our children.
We want to bestow blessings on them as we can.
But there are times, very few times, that maybe their behavior prevents a blessing.
We understand that humanly speaking, do we not?
I want you to think about it spiritually.
God is able to bless us abundantly.
Let me say this.
blessed us abundantly. He has been so good to us, but I want you to think about
the blessings that He has in store for us and ask ourselves the question, am I
living a life that is blessable? Is God going to see fit to bless my life? Am I
living in obedience to Him? Am I trusting Him? Am I following Him? Am I living
pleasing in His life? Because our God is able to bless us abundantly. Again, He has
blessed us beyond measure, but I wonder, are there some blessings that maybe I
have forfeited because of my disobedience? Are there some blessings?
I'm asking myself, but I'm inviting you to ask yourself. Are there some blessings
that I have forfeited from the hand of my good God because of my disobedience? I
think tonight if we'd all be honest, we'd say yes. There's some times in our lives
that we've not been obedient to God and perhaps we've missed out on a blessing
from God. I want to live in such a way that I am blessed and I am blessable. I
can't manufacture God's blessing. I can try. You can try, but a manufactured
blessing pales in comparison to the real thing. Amen? And I want God's blessing
upon my life and I hope that you want it. I know that you do. You want God's
blessing on your life. And so we must live lives that are blessable, that are
pleasing to the Lord. Let's pray. Father, we love you. Thank you for loving us. As
we think about the passage, we understand the historical context and all that's
transpired. I thank you for the obedience of Jacob and responding to the
instruction that's been given. And as we study the next several chapters and see
all that has transpired in his life and your blessing, we know that he's not
perfect and obviously there's plenty of problems that we've already pointed out
in the life of Jacob, but in this instant we find that he responded in obedience.
He departed as he was instructed to. Lord, I see the response of Esau and how
sometimes we can maybe try to manufacture a blessing. And God, I pray
that you'd help us to look at this passage and not only understand the
historical context, but desire and purpose to live lives that are pleasing
in your sight. That we'd be living and behaving in a manner in which is
blessable by you. We thank you that you are so good to us. God, I pray that you'd
move and work as only you can. For it's in Christ's name we pray. Would you stand
with me? Heads are bowed, eyes are closed. We're gonna have just a brief moment of
invitation this evening, give you an opportunity. Maybe you want to come and
thank God for his blessings. Maybe you want to come and ask God to help you to
live a life that is pleasing in his sight, that you would be blessable. God, I don't
want to forfeit any blessings in my life. I don't want to try to manufacture
blessings in my life. I want to live in obedience to your revealed will. As
Kimberly plays, the altar is open.